docs: update dictionaries in state (#1096)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/ui/docs/add-interactivity/update-dictionaries-in-state.md

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def form():
    person, set_person = ui.use_state(
        {
            "first_name": "John",
            "last_name": "Doe",
            "email": "jondoe@domain.com",
        }
    )

    def handle_first_name_change(value):
        person["first_name"] = value

    def handle_last_name_change(value):
        person["last_name"] = value

    def handle_email_change(value):
        person["email"] = value

    return [
        ui.text_field(
            label="First name",
            value=person["first_name"],
            on_change=handle_first_name_change,
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],
            on_change=handle_last_name_change,
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Email", value=person["email"], on_change=handle_email_change
        ),
        ui.text(f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["email"]}'),
    ]

form_example = form()
```

For example, this line mutates the state from a past render:

```python
person["first_name"] = value
```

> The reliable way to get the behavior you are looking for is to create a new dictionary and pass it to `set_person`. But here, you want to also copy the existing data into it because only one of the fields has changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve the desired behavior, it is best to create a new dictionary and pass it to `set_person`. Since only one of the fields has changed, you'll want to copy the existing data into this new dictionary.
```

            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],
            on_change=lambda new_last_name: set_person(
                {
                    **person,
                    "last_name": new_last_name,
                }
            ),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Email",
            value=person["email"],
            on_change=lambda new_email: set_person({**person, "email": new_email}),
        ),
        ui.text(f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["email"]}'),
    ]

form_example = form()
```

Note that the dictionary `unpacking` is “shallow”. It only copies things one level deep. This makes it fast, but it also means that if you want to update a nested property, you’ll have to use it more than once.

## Update a nested dictionary

Consider a nested dictionary structure like this:

```python
person, set_person = ui.use_state(
    {
        "first_name": "John",
        "last_name": "Doe",
        "contact": {"email": "jondoe@domain.com", "phone": "555-5555"},
    }
)
```

If you wanted to update `email`, it’s clear how to do it with mutation:

```python
person["contact"]["email"] = "jdoe@domain.net"
```

> But in `deephaven.ui`, you should treat state as immutable. In order to change `email`, you would first need to produce the new `contact` dictionary (pre-populated with data from the previous one), and then produce the new `person` dictionary which points at the new artwork:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But in `deephaven.ui`, you should treat state as immutable. In order to change `email`, you first need to produce the new `contact` dictionary (pre-populated with data from the previous one), and then produce the new `person` dictionary, which points at the new artwork:
```

                {
                    **person,
                    "first_name": new_first_name,
                    "contact": {**person["contact"]},
                }
            ),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],
            on_change=lambda new_last_name: set_person(
                {**person, "last_name": new_last_name, "contact": {**person["contact"]}}
            ),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Email",
            value=person["contact"]["email"],
            on_change=lambda new_email: set_person(
                {**person, "contact": {**person["contact"], "email": new_email}}
            ),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Phone",
            value=person["contact"]["phone"],
            on_change=lambda new_phone: set_person(
                {**person, "contact": {**person["contact"], "phone": new_phone}}
            ),
        ),
        ui.text(
            f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["contact"]["email"]} {person["contact"]["phone"]}'
        ),
    ]

form_example = form()
```

## Write concise update logic with `deepcopy`

> If your state is deeply nested, you might want to consider flattening it. But, if you do not want to change your state structure, you might prefer to use `deepcopy`. The Python `copy` library includes a `deepcopy` function that constructs a new dictionary and recursively inserts copies of dictionaries found in the original.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your state is deeply nested, you might consider flattening it. If you do not want to change your state structure, you might prefer to use `deepcopy`. The Python `copy` library includes a `deepcopy` function that constructs a new dictionary and recursively inserts copies of dictionaries found in the original.
```

## What is a mutation?

You can store any kind of Python value in state.

```python
x, set_x = ui.use_state(0)
```

Python data types like numbers, strings, and booleans are "immutable", meaning unchangeable or "read-only". You can trigger a re-render to replace a value:

```python
set_x(5)
```

The `x` state changed from `0` to `5`, but the number `0` itself did not change. It is not possible to make any changes to the built-in data types like numbers, strings, and booleans in Python.

Now consider an dictionary in state:

```python
position, set_position = ui.use_state({"x": 0, "y": 0})
```

It is possible to change the contents of the dictionary itself. This is called a mutation:

```python
position["x"] = 5
```

Although dictionaries in `deephaven.ui` state are technically mutable, you should treat them as if they were immutable like numbers, booleans, and strings. Instead of mutating them, you should always replace them.

## Treat state as read-only

You should treat any Python dictionary that you put into state as read-only.

> This example holds an dictionary in state to represent a range. Clicking the button should increment the end of the range, but the range does no update:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example holds a dictionary in state to represent a range. Clicking the button should increment the end of the range, but the range does not update:
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def range_example():
    value, set_value = ui.use_state({"start": 0, "end": 50})

    def handle_press():
        value["end"] = value["end"] + 1

    return [
        ui.range_slider(value=value, label="Range"),
        ui.button("Update", on_press=handle_press),
    ]

my_range_example = range_example()
```

The problem is with this bit of code.

```python
def handle_press():
    value["end"] = value["end"] + 1
```

> This code modifies the dictionary assigned to `value` from the previous render. But without using the state setting function, `deephaven.ui` has no idea that dictionary has changed. So `deephaven.ui` does not do anything in response. While mutating state can work in some cases, we don’t recommend it. You should treat the state value you have access to in a render as read-only.

Reviewer 2: This isn't actually currently true - we do just do a `!=` [check on the dicts](https://github.com/deephaven/deephaven-plugins/blob/05eb407a663e8428f5322d1e86692d00da632bf7/plugins/ui/src/deephaven/ui/hooks/use_effect.py#L36), which in Python just does a shallow compare: https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#typesmapping

We should probably tighten that up a bit... loop through each item in the array and unless it's a primitive type do an `is` instead of an `==`. In `use_effect`: https://github.com/deephaven/deephaven-plugins/blob/05eb407a663e8428f5322d1e86692d00da632bf7/plugins/ui/src/deephaven/ui/hooks/use_effect.py#L36

Author: Which part is not true? I think this is still true:
> But without using the state setting function, `deephaven.ui` has no idea that dictionary has changed.
We do not re-render if we do not call set_state. Should I remove the line the middle:
> While mutating state can work in some cases, we don’t recommend it.
I think we want to keep the bit about treating state as read-only.

Reviewer 2: Yea I guess all this language makes sense, and isn't entirely untrue. It's just we're deviating from what is expected in React; we're doing the dependencies check not quite the same for objects/arrays. Trying to think of an example where it matters... but logged a ticket for fixing that behaviour: https://deephaven.atlassian.net/browse/DH-18529

    return [
        ui.text_field(
            label="First name",
            value=person["first_name"],
            on_change=handle_first_name_change,
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],
            on_change=handle_last_name_change,
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Email", value=person["email"], on_change=handle_email_change
        ),
        ui.text(f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["email"]}'),
    ]

form_example = form()
```

For example, this line mutates the state from a past render:

```python
person["first_name"] = value
```

The reliable way to get the behavior you are looking for is to create a new dictionary and pass it to `set_person`. But here, you want to also copy the existing data into it because only one of the fields has changed:

```python
set_person(
    {
        "first_name": value,
        "last_name": person["last_name"],
        "email": person["email"],
    }
)
```

You can use the dictionary `copy()` method so that you do not need to copy every property separately.

```python
copy = person.copy()
copy["first_name"] = value

> set_person(copy)

Reviewer 2: We can shorten this up with [dictionary unpacking](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#dictionary-displays), e.g.
```python
set_person({ **person, "first_name": value })
```

Author: Updated

```

Now the form works.

Notice you did not need to declare a separate state variable for each input field. For large forms, keeping all data grouped in a dictionary is convenient if updated correctly.

```python

> from deephaven import ui
> 
> 
> @ui.component
> def form():
>     person, set_person = ui.use_state(
>         {
>             "first_name": "John",
>             "last_name": "Doe",
>             "email": "jondoe@domain.com",
>         }
>     )
> 
>     def handle_first_name_change(value):
>         copy = person.copy()
>         copy["first_name"] = value
>         set_person(copy)
> 
>     def handle_last_name_change(value):
>         copy = person.copy()
>         copy["last_name"] = value
>         set_person(copy)
> 
>     def handle_email_change(value):
>         copy = person.copy()
>         copy["email"] = value
>         set_person(copy)
> 
>     return [
>         ui.text_field(
>             label="First name",
>             value=person["first_name"],
>             on_change=handle_first_name_change,
>         ),
>         ui.text_field(
>             label="Last name",
>             value=person["last_name"],
>             on_change=handle_last_name_change,
>         ),
>         ui.text_field(
>             label="Email", value=person["email"], on_change=handle_email_change
>         ),
>         ui.text(f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["email"]}'),
>     ]
> 
> 
> form_example = form()

Reviewer 2: Instead of using `.copy()` show with the unpacking which works in a `lambda`:

```suggestion
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def form():
    person, set_person = ui.use_state({
        "first_name": "John",
        "last_name": "Doe",
        "email": "jondoe@domain.com",
    })

    return [
        ui.text_field(
            label="First name",
            value=person["first_name"],
            on_change=lambda new_first_name: set_person({
                **person,
                "first_name": new_first_name,
            }),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],
            on_change=lambda new_last_name: set_person({
                **person,
                "last_name": new_last_name,
            }),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Email",
            value=person["email"],
            on_change=lambda new_email: set_person({**person, "email": new_email}),
        ),
        ui.text(f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["email"]}'),
    ]

form_example = form()

```

```

Note that the `copy()` method is “shallow”. It only copies things one level deep. This makes it fast, but it also means that if you want to update a nested property, you’ll have to use it more than once.

## Update a nested dictionary

Consider a nested dictionary structure like this:

```python
person, set_person = ui.use_state(
    {
        "first_name": "John",
        "last_name": "Doe",
        "contact": {"email": "jondoe@domain.com", "phone": "555-5555"},
    }
)
```

If you wanted to update `email`, it’s clear how to do it with mutation:

```python
person["contact"]["email"] = "jdoe@domain.net"
```

But in `deephaven.ui`, you should treat state as immutable. In order to change `email`, you would first need to produce the new `contact` dictionary (pre-populated with data from the previous one), and then produce the new `person` dictionary which points at the new artwork:

```python
contact_copy = person["contact"].copy()
contact_copy["email"] = "jdoe@domain.net"
person_copy = person.copy()
person_copy["contact"] = contact_copy

> person_copy(person_copy)

Reviewer 2: Instead of doing it like this, we should do it with unpacking:
```python
new_person = {
  **person,
  "contact": {
    **person["contact"],
    "email": "jdoe@domain.net"
  }
}
```

        {
            "first_name": "John",
            "last_name": "Doe",
            "contact": {"email": "jondoe@domain.com", "phone": "555-5555"},
        }
    )

    def handle_first_name_change(value):
        person_copy = person.copy()
        person_copy["first_name"] = value
        person_copy["contact"] = person["contact"].copy()
        set_person(person_copy)

    def handle_last_name_change(value):
        person_copy = person.copy()
        person_copy["last_name"] = value
        person_copy["contact"] = person["contact"].copy()
        set_person(person_copy)

    def handle_email_change(value):
        contact_copy = person["contact"].copy()
        contact_copy["email"] = value
        person_copy = person.copy()
        person_copy["contact"] = contact_copy
        set_person(person_copy)

    def handle_phone_change(value):
        contact_copy = person["contact"].copy()
        contact_copy["phone"] = value
        person_copy = person.copy()
        person_copy["contact"] = contact_copy
        set_person(person_copy)

    return [
        ui.text_field(
            label="First name",
            value=person["first_name"],

>             on_change=handle_first_name_change,

Reviewer 2: Replace `handle_first_name_change` with a lambda using unpacking

Author: Updated

        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],
            on_change=handle_last_name_change,
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Email",
            value=person["contact"]["email"],
            on_change=handle_email_change,
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Phone",
            value=person["contact"]["phone"],
            on_change=handle_phone_change,
        ),
        ui.text(
            f'{person["first_name"]} {person["last_name"]} {person["contact"]["email"]} {person["contact"]["phone"]}'
        ),
    ]

form_example = form()
```

> ## Write concise update logic with `deepcopy`

Author: Yeah, I had a similar thought when I saw their `useImmer` hook.

        }
    )

    return [
        ui.text_field(
            label="First name",
            value=person["first_name"],
            on_change=lambda new_first_name: set_person(
                {

>                     **person,
>                     "first_name": new_first_name,
>                     "contact": {**person["contact"]},

Reviewer 2: For these first two examples where you're not modifying contact, you don't need to make a copy of contact - it's fine to use the same dict from `person` already.
```suggestion
                    **person,
                    "first_name": new_first_name,
```

                }
            ),
        ),
        ui.text_field(
            label="Last name",
            value=person["last_name"],

>             on_change=lambda new_last_name: set_person(
>                 {**person, "last_name": new_last_name, "contact": {**person["contact"]}}
>             ),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            on_change=lambda new_last_name: set_person(
                {**person, "last_name": new_last_name
            ),
```
